You know, when there's a minute to run,
but you might like to leave some time
for questions. Otherwise, all yours,
Great. Uh, thank you Te
Nui. Hi everyone. I'm Neil.
I'll be one of your mayors today.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
Um, we'll take our submission as read.
I think everybody agrees. We want councils
and government to be as efficient as possible.
Um, the journey to efficiency at scale is
long and continuous.
Take a look around crumbling hospitals, schools,
state highways, police stations, and defense assets,
but this regulation is about council.
So let's consider our collective scale and impact.
In the 20 23 24 financial year,
new Zealand's local councils had combined operating
expenditure of around 18.1 billion in total assets
of approximately 217 billion, uh,
with total revenue also reported around 17.8 billion.
Um, council debt at that stage moved from 31 billion
to 35 billion by 2024, uh,
representing about 200 to 210%
of their income over on average.
Um, and a significant increase since the year 2000.
In terms of debt, um, you may see local government is small,
but our sector is huge
and you need to get this regulation right.
The key objectives have gotta be to deliver infrastructure
and services which meet local expectations,
support growth in housing
and the economy efficiently protect
and enhance publicly owned wealth.
It is my view if you want to do these things credibly,
you should reflect on examples
of successful regulation in New Zealand
and what can be learned from them.
Lines, companies in New Zealand were first significantly
regulated as monopolies under the Commerce Act in 1986,
which involved a special regime
for large electricity lines businesses in its part four,
later amended to part four A in 2001.
This framework was established
to monitor the prices revenue quality
to ensure fair competition
and consumer benefits were the first regulatory decisions
on thresholds issued.
Seven years later, in 2003,
subsequent changes have been made to the Commerce Act
to ship the current, to the current default price path
regime, which allows for companies to apply
for customized price, price paths
with our ramping up investment to meet growing demand.
Um, three decades of carefully managed
and modified economic regulation,
which has worked for New Zealand.
Lions companies are investing appropriately on their
networks to meet demand, and they're efficient.
So what can we learn from this legislation?
Before government can efficiently
and effectively regulate, um, pricing in local government,
they need to undertake detailed benchmarking
to determine efficient prices.
Should rural Southland be expected
to deliver the same efficiency factor as Auckland?
Average rates vary from around $1,500 a year in some parts
of the country to 5,000 a year, depending on where you live.
If you applied a blanket cap of say, CPI plus growth,
plus 2%, should a council, which has kept rates well
below average, be restricted from investing in projects
which support their communities.
I developed a benchmark for councils
and received data from around 30 of the councils, um,
through their long-term plans.
I can send you a link to the data and the portal
and the templates that we developed with a view
that local government does need
to benchmark itself on the journey to efficiency.
We need to standardize the way councils report their core
financial information for the 27 28 long-term plans.
We need to consolidate all council's data as part
of our national data strategy, capturing 10
to 30 year financial forecast for roads
and transport, water, wastewater, stormwater, waste,
minimization and management parks
and public spaces, museums, libraries, art galleries, parks,
venues, public spaces, economic development
and community development.
We need to digitize the information
produced in local government, analyze it,
and carefully regulated over time.
The risk of getting it wrong would be further decline in the
public asset base and the potential
to stifle housing growth.
Nobody wants their local assets run down,
and very few people want to stifle housing growth.
So let's be pragmatic.
Ask yourself if you really have enough information
to confidently regulate the activities
of all councils across New Zealand in a way
that won't undermine any of your other policy objectives
for economic growth in housing.
I don't think you do, and I believe you should be focused on
benchmarking through information disclosure first
to inform better decisions.
Hold off on price caps until you have a clear grasp
of this multi-billion dollar sector.
Um, down in the detail of the bill, um,
we have a perpetual investment fund.
It's, um, projected, uh, protected
by a super majority clause in our standing orders
that requires 75% of council to vote
to open up the capital base.
You guys can't be messing
with our super majority requirement
through these standardized standing orders.
We need the ability to protect that asset, um,
because ultimately this, if it's, if it drops out,
it can be an opportunist council
that can deliver a 50% majority could crack into our, uh,
the capital base of our perpetual investment fund.
Happy to take any questions.
Okay. Thank you very much.
I'm just, uh, looking around the room
to see stunned.
They, you have, uh, made an excellent submission. Thank you.
I think that is, uh, really clear
and I appreciate you taking the time to join us today.
Um, Neil, thank you very much.
Cool. And look, the one other thing if you wanted,
I can send you, I, I circulated across the sector
a draft benchmark template.
Um, we could provide that to the committee
and we can also provide a, um, business information portal
where you could access,
because what I suggest is that the DIA looks
to expand on the benchmarking they've done
with something far more specific
that would support better regulatory outcomes.
So happy to send that through if you're interested.
Thank you. And just in the last 30 seconds,
can I ask one quick, one of the suggestions we had was
around core services,
and rather than having a list having priorities, how would
that work for
You? I think that the,
it depends on whether you're gonna apply a
price path, um, is, is the key thing.
And the definitions need to be really clear because
otherwise we are just gonna end up funding lawyers trying
to determine, um, you know, what what is defined as core.
Okay. Hey, thank you very much once again
for your time today.
We are gonna move to our next submission,
which will be from the tourism industry.
Good. Um, pika, is it, uh, Bruce.
Bruce, I apologize. Uh, it is,
sorry I'm reading the wrong line.
Um, Bruce, thank you for, uh, joining us today in person.
Um, there's 10 minutes.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Otherwise, the, um, the floor is all yours.
Cool. Um, thank you so much, uh,
appreciate the opportunity for speaking to our submission,
uh, this morning.
Uh, name's, uh, Bruce Bassett.
I'm, uh, chief at Pfizer at Tourism Industry.
Aurora, uh, my chief executive, um, Rebecca Ingram, uh,
was unable to attend, so she passes on her apologies.
Uh, and, um, yeah, she, you know, um, you know,
this is very, um, um, so,
so, um, TAA is a
and is tope association, the tourism industry.
We've got 1200 or so, uh, uh, business members.
So we speak very broadly for all types
of tourism businesses.
Uh, and so, um,
and there support a number of the other associations
that your aspects.
Um, so our, our, just to run through some
of the key points from our submission, um,
and, you know, firstly, um, um, our interpretation
of the bill is that by focusing on the core activities
and the way that is being done will limit the ability
of councils to, um, to do the work
that they're currently doing with, uh, business, you know,
economic development and with tourism within that bundle.
Um, and, you know, to explore that a little further, um,
we very much look at tourism as a system, uh,
and it a it's a great massive people moving
around the country and domestic living internationally,
and they, they come and go.
They go pass through a whole bunch of different hands.
Uh, and there are, there are three key, you know, sort
of sectors that are, uh, have part
to play the tourism industry itself, our multitude
of member businesses and the like.
They provide services and products to, to visitors, uh,
and they're really good at it.
Um, so they, they do that well.
And, um, great, great experiences for our visitors.
Uh, central government's got a whole range
of roles to play with.
Its policy settings. It supports tourism and marketing.
Uh, it, it sets rules of the game
and it runs some programs to support, um, parts of,
of the industry itself.
So really important in that respect.
Uh, the local government role, uh, is equally important,
if not more and important.
Uh, the local government looks after the place
and tourism takes place at the place.
Um, so how local government sort of runs its, uh,
its location and its facilities, amenities, uh,
and so forth helps, um, you know, supports events, uh,
operates this destination management plans
invests in things like, you know, um, uh,
local regional airports, uh, conference facilities
and like, they're just vitally important parts of the fabric
of the tourism industry.
Uh, and you know, to swing back to my first comment, we see
that the bill has worded, uh, really, uh, creates a,
an enormous amount of risk
for the way the tourism industry functions
from the local government perspective.
Uh, and, uh, the, the committee, you know, really ask you
to be, be be aware of that, uh, consequential, um,
aspect of the bill in relation to the tourism industry
and those local government functions.
Um, the government has set a growth agenda, um,
and it's articulated in tourism
through the tourism growth agenda that the Minister
of Tourism and Hospitality, um, Louise Abston, uh,
introduced, uh, a few months ago.
Uh, and there's a lot of work going on with that, um,
process at the moment,
and it's looking at a whole range of things
that are relevant to the work of your workers, um,
of the committee in that, how the tourism system works, uh,
what are the structures, what are the funding mechanisms,
what roles get best done where, uh, and so forth.
So the government's goal is to double, uh, tourism exports
by, uh, 2034.
Um, tourism industry very much supports that.
Uh, but we, we do believe,
and the minister believes that there was needs
to be work done on the supply side of the industry,
make sure we've got the capacity
and the quality, uh, to achieve the goal.
So that's, you know, again, a, a portion of that falls,
falls to local government to play a, an active, uh, role
in being able to do so.
Um, so you know, that, that, that's kind
of why this is important to us as a,
as an industry association and to the industry more broadly.
Um, and, um, when we picked into the wording of the bill
and the, uh, the, the, the paper going into it, um,
we started seeing, um, a, a mismatch between
what was intended perhaps
and what was actually reflected in the bill,
uh, as we read it.
Uh, the problem with the, the bill is that as it's worded,
it allows economic growth and development,
but only for the purposes of local infrastructure,
local public services, performance of regulatory functions.
So within that, we don't see any way that, um,
the purpose of local government will be enabled
to do the tourism functions.
Uh, and that's the, the another our, our, our concern.
Um, we sort of, uh, just reinforcing when we looked at the,
um, uh, um, the cabinet paper
and how the minister articulated what he was seeking
to achieve from the, from the bill, uh, it,
it, it actually wasn't there.
It was about an opening economic growth and development
and doing that appropriately.
So we think, um, in, in our submission,
we suggest different wording that actually incorporates, uh,
economic growth and develop economic development, um,
within, uh, that section, uh, 10 be itself.
Uh, and that would more directly enable, uh,
the tourism functions to be undertaken.
So that's what we got with Bill.
We suggest some wording, uh, changes, uh,
and, uh, we really, really, um,
for the committee to, to take that seriously.
'cause the consequences for the tourism industry, uh,
had a whole bunch of local government activities, um,
be extremely serious, um, of our local authorities.
Uh, nearly all of them, uh, if not all
of them could do tourism s at the moment.
Some of them do really important large scale, um, things,
and they create a lot of benefit for
communities from doing those, whether it's hosting events,
festivals, and the like, that really, um, you know,
generate, um, some vibe.
Um, you know, and they support local businesses.
You know, I, we start the example of TPO in this, uh,
submission where, um, a really large proportion of the, uh,
food and beverage places wouldn't exist without tourism.
A large proportion of their retail activities wouldn't,
uh, exist without tourism.
Uh, local government's got a really important roll
through its seasonality strategies
and attracting events in the, like, as a lever for,
for change, you know, for improving, um, you know, um,
a whole bunch of outcomes for communities.
So I'll leave it at that
and really happy to take any questions.
Okay. Uh, it looks like we've got a few,
very quickly at the moment, tourism, uh, councils
can still put money into economic growth
and development, um,
but under this legislation only by the provision
of good quality infrastructure, public services and,
and tourism's view, are you saying would be that,
say promoting the region, um,
wouldn't fit into the good quality public infrastructure,
public services, therefore it can't, can't be done.
Um, it, that, that would be our interpretation of it.
Yes. Um, but you'd
Like to be able to put money into what promotion
of the area, say a visit wire campaign
Or something? Absolutely.
You know, and then, and then do the other thing.
It's not just promotion. It's not just marketing.
It's about, about investing the fabric of the place so
that you have a, you know, nice urban, you know, nice, uh,
you know, quality environment for people to participate in.
And that's where the mixed use benefit
with benefiting councils comes through as well.
Well, it's good for visitors is good for residents. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Um, and so yeah, the wording as it stands, we,
we just don't, we would see it would be a, it,
you would have to, you would have
to contort yourself to make it work.
Uh, and that I wouldn't think would be the intent
of the, the legislation.
Thank you. Uh, la Uh, thank you.
Uh, thanks for your comments and your submission.
You commented on the government's ETH agenda,
and the wording doesn't seem to reflect, uh, how
that can be done in the tourism tourism industry.
Can you just comment a bit further on that, please?
Well, you know, if we've, um,
the growth agenda is about doubling tourism,
tourism excerpts by 20 30, 34.
The industry supports that we believe, you know,
our New Zealand place and international markets, so
that's absolutely doable,
but we have to have the ability
to invest on our supply side elements
to make sure we've got the capacity,
and we've got the quality, uh, to, to do, you know,
to do really well by our visitors.
So, um, you know, regional airports might need to, uh,
invest in their, their capacity
or systems to grow a lot of those re local,
local government owned.
Um, the, you know, the, the, um, uh, to,
to get that growth in tourism, you're going to need
to have other strategies like seasonality and dispersal.
Um, both of those believers are reasonably weak,
but local governments hold the really good ones,
which is about organizing a program
of events, uh, and the like.
So, um, you know, it's gonna, it's going to, to be able
to achieve the goal, it's gonna take a lot
of people doing a lot of things in different sectors.
Uh, and, and I, you know, we argue
that local government is certainly gonna
have an important role in that.
And just a quick sentence to share is around the wording.
'cause you did specifically comment on the wording of that.
So yes, there's sectors, yes, there grow it,
but the wording has
to be reflected in this bill to achieve it.
Um, I, I, I think that if the bill enables economic,
um, development and including tourism, yes, um,
that will give sufficient per guidance to councils that,
that, that is actually one of their jobs, um,
you know, under legislation.
So, so that's why we are seeking the, the placement of,
you know, the economic development in the appropriate place.
Thank you. Two,
Two quick slightly different questions.
Um, the first one is that the minister
of tourism has expressed some concern
that currently some councils are not contributing
to their regional tourism organizations at all.
Um, do you think this bill
will help those concerns in any way as it stands?
Um, I, I would hope so.
Um, you know, because at the moment the local council roles
and tourism sort of, um, they're not,
they're not defined in any legislation.
Uh, they are, they are, uh, are done, uh, you know, as,
as the council sees fit
for the benefit of their communities.
Um, and, and, and, you know,
and I'll use the example of, uh, the, the Waikato, uh,
where there are seven local authorities contributing
to one regional tourism organization.
And, uh, that is always a, a very tricky exercise
to get sufficient of those seven
local authorities be contributing to, to, you know,
providing enough funding for an effective regional
tourism organization.
So making it clear that it is a role,
I think would assist in that.
Um, well, that would be
with your amendment, not as it stands,
Uh, not as it stands, not with, with argument. Thank you.
Um, the other question I had,
and it probably does relate to doubling the tourism numbers,
but spreading both in time and space.
Um, a lot of our tourism is reliant on,
um, healthy state of nature.
You have put in suggested some changes to the purpose
that look about economic growth,
but, um, surely tourism
also relies on a healthy
and thriving natural environment for many, not all,
but many of the activities.
Um, um, I, I agree with you.
Um, uh, for tourism to flourish, uh,
our communities have to flourish.
Our environment has to flourish.
Uh, we are working really hard to make tourism an agent good
of nature in New Zealand.
So we we're contributing to, uh, pest control
and water quality, uh, and,
and working with Department of Conservation
and our concessionaries do a vast amount
of work in those areas.
So we, we are really fostering that strength
and relationship between tourism, uh, for good,
for conservation and our nature in New Zealand.
So as we grow, that will only provide more
ability to do more. Good.
I understand the good work that many operators are doing,
and that the tourism industry overall is trying to make.
What I'm trying to focus on is the purpose
of local government as expressed in the, in the draft bell
doesn't really talk much about environmental health.
Um, yes, I, I, I see, see the, the, uh, the point
of difference, um,
and in, in terms of the wording of the bill, I,
I can't really comment on that.
Um, uh, but,
but I know that a tourism industry would interpret
a growing industry as one where it needs to contribute more,
um, in terms of the role itself of local government,
I'm sort of, uh, I'm,
I haven't actually specifically looked into that. Thank
You. Thank you very
much for your time,
and thanks for giving us a few extra minutes.
It was really very helpful.
Thank you. Thank you so Much.
Um, we're gonna move next to Citizens Advice Bureau online,
and I think we're gonna be joined by Kerry Dalton,
the chief executive.
Just wait for, um, maybe her
to turn her camera on now that she's promoted.
Welcome, Kerry. Thanks for joining us.
We've got 10 minutes set aside for you.
Um, I'll let you know when there's a minute to run, but
otherwise, the time's all yours,
Kerry Dalton, I'm the Chief Executive of the Citizens
of Ice Bureau, or the CAB as we are affectionately known.
Um, the CAB is staffed
by over 2000 fully trained volunteers from 80 CAB sites
across roa.
We provide free help to, to anyone to navigate their issues
and problems and understand their options
as a universal service.
There are no barriers to people seeking our help.
The CAB is often a first port of call
and is also where council
and central government agencies send people when they don't
have the answers or the time to help.
Last year, c AABs helped over 300,000 clients
to understand their rights and responsibilities
and connect with services
and support Through our service, we increase the engagement
and participation of people in their communities
by empowering them to know what their rights
and options are, so that they're able to contribute
to a well-functioning civil society.
This in turn, underpins
and supports economic growth as our service supports
people to be aware, knowledgeable, resourced,
and skilled to participate in their community
and contribute more broadly to society.
More than a hundred thousand people have volunteered
countless hours to helping others in their community
during our 55 years of existence.
This has strengthened communities
and democracy throughout al New Zealand.
We consider it essential that the purpose statement
of the acts puts community wellbeing at its center
as local government makes decisions by
and on behalf of communities.
The four wellbeings acknowledge
that local government has a broader role in fostering strong
and livable communities,
rather than simply providing core services.
Therefore, we oppose the introduction
of the new purpose statement
and the removal of the references
to the four wellbeings from the act.
We acknowledge the government's desire to alleviate rates,
pressures for communities.
However, removing the four wellbeings from the purpose
of local government is not the way to do this.
As the bill's explanatory note acknowledges rates rises have
been primarily driven by the rising costs of infrastructure,
the rising costs of what this bill defines.
As core, the Department
of Internal Affairs regulatory impact statement states
that cost pressures on councils are being driven by capital
and operating cost escalation
flowing from supply chain upheaval
and a tight labor market during the COVID-19 pandemic
and accelerated headline inflation since
it also states that infrastructure costs have long been a
major cause of rate increases with councils needing
to upgrade infrastructure, especially for water
and wastewater treatment plants,
and invest in more infrastructure to meet growth demands.
It also advised that proposed changes
when considered in isolation are unlikely
to benefit communities more than the status quo.
Given this, we strongly argue for the retention
of the four wellbeings as part of the core purpose
of local government, because of how important they are.
The four wellbeings promote the sense of neighborhood
and belonging that in turn promotes safety
and security connection, helpfulness, community mindedness,
weaving together stronger communities,
which in turn provides the conditions
for stronger economic growth with the growing occurrence
of severe weather and flooding events,
and the likelihood of a higher frequency of such events.
As climate change continues,
we are seeing a heightened sense of the importance
of having in place strong social support structures
to help people navigate their way through the myriad of new
and growing problems and challenges.
These changes are bringing,
having a focus on community wellbeing is a real investment
in community resilience against the shocks of climate change
and weather and other emergencies.
Councils cannot be reduced to just services and facilities.
They have a broader and important role in building
and maintaining real community strength,
resilience and wellbeing.
And references to the four wellbeings
must remain in the act.
In our submission, I have asked
for the community's help in protecting the vital role
of the CAB in communities.
Each CAB is its own legal entity,
and councils are the primary funder of most
of their local cas.
While councils have long recognized the crucial role
that the CAB plays in local communities, the repeal
of the four wellbeings
and the introduction of the new purpose statement in 2012
lead to some councils being uncertain as
to whether they could continue
to fund their local CAB at the time.
They would only enter into short-term funding agreements.
Because of this lack of clarity,
council funding is essential to the ongoing survival
of most c AABs.
If it is withdrawn, these CAS would no longer exist.
Given the current bill is reducing the same,
it is introducing the same amendments
that caused uncertainty in our funding.
Before we ask that there is clarification
provided in the bill
that the CAB does come under the definition
of a local public service,
and that specific reference is made to the CAB as a service
that councils can fund, not must fund,
but can fund.
We also wish to make the point
that our local S receive no central government
funding at all.
We consider that this is wrong
and that central government should be contributing more, not
as replacement funding for council funding,
but to enable the growth and development
and sustainability of such a vital service
to meet the changing needs of people.
This is even more pertinent in a world
where government services, both local
and central, are relying
on community partners like the CAB to fill the human gaps
created by a digital first or digital only presence.
Uh, and to support our role in helping people access
and navigate services, including government services online,
it is appropriate for local government to be funding c AABs,
but central government also needs to do its bit,
and the fact that it is not adequately doing
so while relying on the CAB service so much
is an irony in relation to the drivers
and stated rationale of this bill.
We therefore ask that this committee recommend
that there is an increase in central government funding
for the essential service that the CAB provides.
Thank you very much.
Um, here, pretty clearly it sounds like your main concern is
around funding for Citizens Advice Bureau
specifically is, is that correct?
There's two aspects to this.
One is about needing to retain
the focus of local government on
supporting community wellbeing.
And the other is in relation to the CAB,
that it is made clear that if these amendments do proceed,
that, um, the CAB is, um, able
to be considered as a public service that councils can fund.
Thank, thank you. I mean, I've met the local, um,
CAB on the company coast.
They do a an incredible job.
So I've seen firsthand the work they do.
It's, it's your, your team there. Do a really good job.
Um, I I I'm just wanting to make sure I understand.
You've said that if, if this changes and
therefore councils might not provide some funding that,
that, that, that you would have to close.
I'm, I'm just wondering was, was
that the experience back in say, 20 16, 17 18? In
The end, um, we, um,
we managed to continue to get the funding from the council.
The minister of local government actually wrote a letter
clarifying that, um, the CAB
was able to be considered as a public service
to provide that clarity.
Um, we are seeking that same clarity from this committee.
Okay, I understand. So, so the wording of the bill,
even at that time, was okay.
It was just you needed the clarity.
Uh, we needed the, the explicit, I think that what
happened was that the councils were uncertain as to,
because it was a signal about the need to reduce, um,
or, um, yeah, reduce their, their, um,
their services and their scope that they were unsure
as to where the CAD sat in that.
And we just want the clarity that the CAB is a service
that would meet the definition of public service.
Thank you. And I appreciate the clarity.
I'm, I'm not trying to, to have a go here, I just want
to stand, 'cause I've read some of your older annual reports
and they talk about that lack of funding clarity.
Like I'm looking at the 20 21 1 at the moment, and,
and I can just see that your teams have been working really
hard and, and amongst some uncertainty over many,
many years, um, to deliver really great stuff.
And I'm just wanting to under make sure
I've heard you really clearly.
Yes. And, uh, the other really clear, so one,
there was a specific, there were specific situations
where council officials were saying, we are not going to
enter into a long-term agreement with you a three year one
because we are not sure where we are going
to land in relation to these changes
that are being brought in.
But the other point I really wanna make is
to get this committee's help in relation
to our border front funding issue, which actually relates
to central government funding as well.
Um, as I said in my submission, that, um,
central government needs to step up, um,
in terms of recognizing
and supporting the role that the CAB plays
in helping people navigate central
government services as well.
Tha thank you. And I think you've made that really,
really, really well.
And, and obviously we're aware of that in MB
and DIA contracts and things.
Um, unfortunately we're out of t time there.
Did you want something really quick?
Just a really quick stop on that.
So CA bank helps people navigate both council
and central go government issues.
What's the split in funding, if you happen to know it,
between what the local CAS get from council
and anything they might receive from central government?
They currently get no funding from central government.
That's what I thought. Thank you.
Thanks so much. And we're gonna now move
to Hamilton City Council, uh,
who are also joining us online.
So they sought out problems course government.
Good morning. Good morning.
Welcome, uh, your worship and,
and team there in, I'm not gonna mention City of the future,
but it's, uh, great to see you.
Uh, you've got 10 minutes for your submission
and I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Otherwise, it's all yours.
Thank you very much. Definitely the city
of the now as well.
Just put that in there.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to present.
We really appreciate that.
Um, it's been a bit of a compressed timescale, so
we're in the odd situation of, uh, me being the mayor
for approximately two more days potentially.
And then the new council having to get their head
around all the complexity of this, um, um,
soon after reelection.
And just making the point that of course, that, um,
some mayors, uh, are tied up with their electioneering,
not me, but also, uh, some councils will consider,
will see considerable turnover.
So their ability to understand the detail will be, uh,
under this compressed timescale
will be a little bit difficult.
Um, like everyone around the country, I'd love to be able
to deliver low rates and make that promise and stick to it.
But, um, what we, uh, come up against
really is the inability
to raise any other sufficient revenue for the fast growth
that a city like ours is experiencing.
Um, we do not have many, uh, sources of funding
to rely upon, and the majority of the funding that we do,
the revenue that we do get in, is actually directed
to core infrastructure.
When you consider, uh, water
and transport being the two largest, uh,
and then some critical community amenities,
but basically core infrastructure, uh, we feel the, um,
Bill's explanatory note does rightly acknowledge
that rates are primarily increasing due
to these critical infrastructure costs.
So you can see the link in our view.
And when you look at some of the work that Trics
and others are putting out, it's quite clear that the cost
increases faith by local governments very, uh,
very firmly within the construction labor markets that are,
uh, I think Brad Olson has often suggested it might be
as high as 27% if there was such a thing
as a local government inflation index.
Uh, but most of our work is on the core services.
So the potential for us to reduce rates will be limited
outside of getting new funding tools.
Uh, addressing the shortcomings
of local government's funding and financing system
therefore becomes critical
before limiting council's ability to collect rates.
Um, because otherwise we are just going to have
to put on hold
or push out until the never, never critical elements
of growth infrastructure for.
And I can give you one example might be the Southern
wastewater plant required to open up that whole area
of land in the north white part in the South Hamilton
and the airport precinct.
Um, the current rating system is just straining
for metros like Hamilton and a fast growing.
And I know I have similar conversations
with my colleague mayor, um, Mahe over in the, in to, to,
uh, we therefore we prefer,
or we'd strongly recommend that the bill's implementation
be deferred until July, 2027 to align
with the long-term planning cycle.
We have, in fact, embedded in our long-term plan
and just gone through an annual plan.
Implementing the bill
before then will force us to amend our LTP significantly
to undergo, uh, rigid consultation requirements
and, um, further audits, significant cost to council.
And the other part I want to mention is the, um,
clarity on core services.
Uh, we approve of, um, some of the current thinking,
but we think it needs
to go a little bit further and a little bit clearer.
For example, waste management.
We believe it needs to encompass not just the collection
and disposal of waste, but look at the full scope of
waste minimization.
And for example, we were one of the first councils
to roll out food collections, waste food collections.
Recreational facilities remains a little bit unclear to us.
Do multipurpose venues like halls
and community centers count in that definition.
Um, cultural facilities such
as art galleries for those included.
And, um, we support that.
A better word to encompass these things would be community
amenities as in the previous legislation.
And I just note that in the case of Hamilton, uh, a number
of those community recreational facilities
and community amenities, um, underpin a strong tourism
and therefore add to the, um, general economy.
If we look at our events economy,
and I just note that I was at the Tourism
and Events, um, conference in Hamilton recently,
and Minister Louise Upton spoke to the, um, audience
and noted that there is a role for councils to play in
encouraging tourism and events
as key economic drivers for New Zealand.
And I feel that that's slightly
therefore at odds with how the bill is currently drafted.
Um, if we are to play a part in building those economic
activities, what does that look like?
What part do we play and what part do other people play?
So, um, moving on, uh, we did, we weren't opposed
to profile council profiles,
but we were concerned on a number of elements.
Um, the data wasn't entirely, uh,
correct in making the comparisons.
And so potentially a little bit misleading when you are
comparing pairing apples with pears.
Hamilton actually faces unique trap challenges as, as the,
what was the fastest growing for two years
and still in the top four fastest growing, um, compared
to the comparator group that we were lump, we were put into,
uh, the rate, the focus,
the profiles focus on rates increases,
but then actually ignored uh, other factors like the amount
of money we have invested into critical infrastructure
and also the median rate impact.
For example, we had the lowest median residential rate
of any city, uh,
before the 20, uh, 24, 34 long-term plan.
And of course, that has led to us needing
to increase rates at a higher rate of the last two years.
And that flowed on into that data in the profiles.
Um, our rates are actually now middle of the pack
for the large metros,
but this is lost in that ex in any, well in the lack
of ex explanation provided by those profiles profile.
And we're concerned that, um,
the same blunt approach may be applied to rate capping
and leading to some unuseful, um, comparisons.
Uh, one, one of further couple of further things.
We oppose clause 16 in terms of Tori Treaty of Ang, um,
which would repeal the requirement
to consider Tik Maori in appointing CCO board members.
Um, we believe we have firsthand, uh, experience
of the many, um, benefits of working
with the Maori relationship, strengthening those cultural,
but more importantly economic ties as well.
Uh, and so we think that leads to much better outcomes.
And if you, um, want to think about it in the terms
of what's happened in rural coura, uh, inland port,
for example, rates capping, we know
that rates capping is not included within the bill,
but may build upon the bill's provisions.
And we just want to support, uh, others who've, um,
who've noted that rate capping done wrongly, uh,
could actually have unintended cost increases
and be damaging for council's reputation, um,
and not actually achieve the result expected if it's,
uh, done in a blunt way.
So we urge further conversation with councils to understand
how best the implications of this would roll out.
And, uh, we urge the committee to recommend
to the government to work closer with us before this.
Any rates capping isn't enacted.
And I think that sits in line with
and LGN Z's submission also.
But I'll leave it there because I would, we'd like to,
I have my staff and that would love to, um, be able
to answer any technical questions that you have or concerns.
Thank you. I'm just looking, uh, around the room to see
if there are any questions. Celia Wayne Brown.
Yes. Um, thank you for the particular points you've made.
I've just got a bit of a general question that, um, having
a shopping list of what councils should do
and trying to shoehorn that
into legislation is very difficult when we
have such a range of different shapes and sizes of councils.
Um, one near me is a tar district council, which has a lot
of roads, um,
and has a very, very small rating base.
And then we've got Auckland City.
I mean, if we are going to create a shopping list,
we are potentially going to impose too much
activity on the small councils
and miss something that would be appropriate
for a global city like Auckland
or dare I say it, the capital.
Uh, I think the way way we would suggest around
that is having the flexibility within the bill
to allow councils to determine with their community
what the most needs are as opposed
to being really prescriptive right down to
that very broad detail.
But if there's a, a activity class that allows us
to consider, um, community amenity that would add
to the economy, then we should maybe be allowed to do it if
that is within the, um, wishes of the community.
'cause you have to consult on all these matters,
uh, because you're right.
Um, we can't be compared to rural provincial New Zealand
because their needs are different,
but we are building big scale infrastructure.
And for example, here's one example
that Hamilton is per capita really short on aquatic space,
and we are trying to work with the, um, uh, private partners
to see if we can get another swimming pool built for the,
the, um, east of Hamilton.
Um, and we should be able to potentially do that.
But at the moment it's not quite clear if
that's a core function or a nice to have.
And I, I might just, uh, add an anecdote.
I was very pleased to meet with Bruce Clarkson
and look at the proposed fence sanctuary
and that would also presumably not be clear as
to whether council could support that at all.
Well, well, that's right.
Um, there are a lot of, um, there's a lot of gray
around the edges and I guess we just need to work closely
and we, we are happy to provide more, uh,
specific examples on all of those, uh, if that's helpful.
Thank you. Um, just to set from very
Quick thanks chair.
Um, you made an earlier comment, uh, with regards
to council profiles.
Uh, the dash is not entirely correct
because it was comparative analysis, um,
comparing apples with peers.
It's just a set 'cause you were talking about, um,
the usefulness of, uh, Hamilton.
Can you unpack that a little bit more?
Yes, I will. I'll, I'll ask staff to, to
to better describe the me why there were some anomalies in
the accuracy because of the timing.
Kiara James Clark,
corporate planning and advocacy manager.
Um, I think one of the best examples of that,
which mayor Paula touched on is,
is the focus on rates increases rather
than the quantum of rates.
Um, it, it just felt like very crude, um,
headline analysis without really unpicking what's going on.
So it looks like we've had
that the highest rates increase in the last year, it,
it completely ignores the fact that we started
with the lowest rates and that we are, we are now middle
of the pack, uh, that that's on Yeah, on, on a,
on a capita basis.
Um, and we, we, and we are nervous that such an approach if,
if that were, how rate capping were introduced.
So that was just simply you, you may not increase your rates
by more than X percent without any regard to
what you are delivering the context in which you're
delivering it and the rates at the current moment, we,
we think that could have very damaging sort of consequences
and it would be, would be, we, we are just calling, I guess
for a more nuanced, uh, approach than, than simply a,
a flat cap that, that there's no, there's no sort
of negotiation on.
Thank you. Thanks.
And just the last one from me,
I'll just ask maybe a bit more of a direct one,
but I noticed that Hamilton council, along with a couple
of others, have made comments about, um, councils
around the country being justifiably frustrated about the
removal and reintroduction cycle of the four wellbeings,
and we should have a cross party working arrangement
for this, but I've also read your submission when they were
last reintroduced in 2018,
and there was nothing like that in it.
It, it was a, let's go and change this again.
So, uh, uh, uh, is there a genuine desire
to see cross party work on this?
Or actually you just wanna see it one particular way?
No, no. There's a genuine desire.
I mean, there, there's a, a lot of gray in
that argument too, because we support in general being able
to work with our community and set up our LTP
accordingly on the four wellbeings that we were required
to consider, and we reported against those all our activity.
Um, that's now changed.
We do understand that, um, we are to roll out
what the government is requesting of us,
but we do think that given
what we just said about core business
and not core business, there are some areas now
where it's not clear whether we are in that game anymore
or we are not in that game anymore, anymore.
And we'd love to have a conversation about if we are not,
if the social wellbeings now fall to the community, we need
to have some conversations with our community.
We need to work out how those social
wellbeings might be supported.
Yeah. So that that makes it much, much clearer.
So you'd be up for that discussion. Absolutely.
Even if it, even if it lands with what we have now
and that's removing those four wellbeings.
Yes. We just wanted to yeah. Get some clarity about that.
And I think on a personal level, having been in, um,
local government for 24 years, yeah, I think
that piece on local government form,
which didn't really progress as far as we might have liked,
I think that's an essential piece of the work too.
We've got to kind of consider what's fit
for purpose local government in, in entirety,
not in little bits, if that makes sense.
But that's probably a strong personal view I have.
I feel like some kind
of local government reform is
necessary. Let's talk about that.
Thank you. And thanks for letting us go a bit over time
just to, um, just to get into that.
Thank you for your time. Oh, we appreciate it.
Nelson aren't with us here.
So we are just gonna, um, suspend for our lunch break now,
and we will be back for a 1250
start Oh, with Nelson.
So, so you have a,
uh, let's go to Nelson.
Nelson Tasman Climate Forum.
Welcome, thanks for joining us today. Nice to see you.
Um, we've got 10 minutes, uh, set aside for you,
so I'll let you know when there's a minute to go,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
Otherwise, it's all yours.
Thank you very much. I'm David Bartel
and speak for the Nelson Tasman Climate Forum.
We are community-based organization
that facilitates climate action
and adaptation in the top of the south area.
We feel qualified to speak with you today first
because of our effective collaborations with local councils,
and secondly, from
what we have learned about public expectations
of our councils.
That is Nelson City and Tasman district.
We work with both my former comments focus particularly
on the proposed changes to the purpose of the act
because this is so fundamental.
We have made other points in our submission,
but I'll leave those as red.
So, as you know, our councils face extraordinary challenges
from extreme weather events, which have decimated farms
and homes and roads in our Model acre region race recently
and previously in around Norton.
And this is in addition to the financial challenges
that are normal for every local body.
So we urge you to retain the four wellbeings
in the act as the primary purpose.
Uh, these, uh, four wellbeings essentially mandate councils
to facilitate sustainable communities
through the most appropriate mix of approaches.
And I'll illustrate this, the proposed narrowing
of purpose in our view would prevent that type
of relationship and benefit.
So what exactly have the four wellbeings delivered
and why should they be retained?
Perhaps first and foremost,
they do help build proper inquiry and mutual understanding
and agreement around the council table.
I, like many of you have seen this so many times,
there can be very difficult conversations,
but the four wellbeings do enable our mayors
to strike a balance that achieves ongoing support.
Then there's the fact that they support a huge diversity
of desirable projects.
So in this region, they include specific innovations
and initiatives on things like waste reduction,
active transport, environmental protection,
cultural creativity and recreation.
This breadth of purpose has enabled our council
to establish community hubs to give renewed hope
to devastated communities at Tap and Wakefield.
So these are new ideas,
new initiatives being played out in our communities.
These innovations need council seed money
and support to get started.
They strengthen community engagement,
including the many local volunteer groups.
They're cheap and attract good people to the council table.
So if our councils only do roads
and rules, who's gonna stand for election?
As you know, that's a problem at the
prison, not enough candidates.
We need to make councils attractive and interesting.
Will the proposed new purpose achieve desired outcomes?
Looking closely at the intervention logic
for the proposed changes, our group have concluded
that the proposed new wording is, dare I say it naive.
We say this because of what we see is the expectations
of our communities and their connectivity to government.
In Tasman district,
our rural communities do not expect good
quality infrastructure.
They have their own water and sewage,
and they want roads to stay open.
Gravel is fine as long as it's not, as long
as it's on the road and not the paddock.
Our communities are so well expressed by our candidates
and the local body elections look to the council
to build a swimming pool,
but also to plan for climate change.
Getting them on site is hugely cost saving.
For example, our local,
local communities have actively contributed to many hundreds
of thousands of native trees planted.
When there's a flood, everyone gets stuck
in to help their neighbors.
Removing of environmental, social, cultural,
and economic from the local government core purpose sends
entirely the wrong message to our communities,
to our volunteers and the people at Muckin,
please reconsider, many of you express sympathy
to communities in Nelson
and Tasman following our extreme weather events.
Recovery support has to be broad based,
pragmatic application by council
of the four world beings contributes to the lifeblood,
what I call lifeblood
of our local communities at this difficult time,
which is continuing on,
is narrowing the purpose the best way to control costs.
This is the core question, isn't it?
The idea of narrowing of purpose is the best way
to control costs would be commendable if it was right.
Sadly, as you know, there are many cost pressures
and financial risks on local government.
The most significant cost es are more likely
to come from servicing urban sprawl.
Inadequate, scoped out, inadequately, scoped out projects
impacts the extreme, extreme weather events
and costs transferred from government such
as transport subsidies.
The proposed narrowing of purpose is much more likely
to increase these costs rather than to reduce them.
Some costs increases are of course unavoidable.
The yea dam was not the first water supply to be billed.
You'll all have heard about how
that dam cost increased multiple times.
But remember that more recent
and bigger projects are always more expensive
and complicated to design and implement.
So these projects does contribute both to upfront costs
and to incur debt with consequent interest servicing.
There are also challenging environmental
and social trade-offs to get buy-in.
We needed buy-in on the yea dam who should pay,
have the current multifactor purpose of the act.
Sorry, here, the current multifaceted purpose
of the act is fundamental to building community buy-in.
So, you know, we need that broad brush
to get everyone on board.
Some with grt teeth and one, some with bigger smiles,
but it's how, that's how councils work around here.
And we as a non-governmental organization commend
what is being achieved.
So that's all I wanted to say.
Uh, and I thank you for listening open to any comments
or suggestions or, thank you.
Thank you very much for your, uh, submission.
I'm just seeing if there are any,
it doesn't look like there are any questions, so we, um,
so thanks again for your time and for joining us.
We'll move on to our next submitter with that.
Thank you very much. Um, thank you, which is the
Taxpayer's Union on Zoom.
Welcome. Um, we've got 10 minutes for you, uh,
both for your submission.
So, um, I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Otherwise, uh,
you might like to have some time for questions. All yours.
Perfect. Thank you very much.
Um, so I am James Ross, head
of policy here at the Taxpayers Union.
I'm joined by Jordan Williams, our executive director.
Uh, thank you for giving us the opportunity
to submit on this bill today, which we feel
as a general rule is pretty good at identifying problems,
perhaps less good at actually fixing them.
Uh, and on that note, I'll pass over to Jordan.
I thank you, James. Look, um,
I've only really got one comment for the committee,
and I wanna focus on, on a particular area
where I'm confident the taxpayers union have been the sole
voice, uh, on,
and it is this, that it's all very well for
taxpayer groups including, um, yours truly and
and others to get hoppity hoppity mad about poor governance
and local government.
But we have a regime where, uh,
councilors are regularly denied information.
It's, uh, constitutionally barbaric.
You can't expect a company director to be able
to effectively do their job without the
statutory right to information.
Now, it was just the, I understand from, um, uh,
count elected officials from a generation ago
that it was just an asserted common law, right?
Um, however, now more
and more you have the managerial class.
You have chief executive saying, no, I'm sorry,
counselor, that is operational.
You're not entitled to that.
So we fit for more than 10 years, have actually argued
for increased rights
or equivalent of company directors rights, that information.
Um, and this bill, um, seems to pick up the problem
and acknowledge the problem and says that it's gonna fix it,
but actually takes us backwards for two reasons.
One, I mean, it, it only applies to documents.
Well, I mean, that is nuts.
Um, the idea that my board could ask me a question
and I could say, well, I'm sorry
that's not contained in the document, is, um, uh, hardly
enabling directors to do their job,
or in this case, uh, counselors
and two, is actually a lower standard than the existing leg.
So I, I don't know whether this is officials, um,
directly trying to undermine the government
or the minister's intention here,
or it's just drafters
that have never sat on a board in their life.
But, um, it is, uh, it is so bad
that it's actually something that we would resist despite
the fact being, I'm very confident the germ of this idea.
Okay. Uh, just as a quick follow up to that,
Jordan did mention, but I'd really like
to hammer this point home is that it's, it's not clear
to us, and I've seen a few others submitters have made this
same point, that this is more permissive than the current
regime we're using now,
that regime cl clearly isn't working.
We've seen on the ground what happens when officials, uh,
you know, delay or, or obfuscate information.
This is a step backwards and it's a real shame
because it's, it's one
of the quarters functions in the local government sector.
Thank you. Um, so can you just expand on that point?
It was really Jordan's last point
around access to information.
So you would like it to apply what would have, um, not just
to documents, but to what, to all information, uh,
is is it just a catchall phrase like that of
Of course it is. I mean,
there, there's, there's,
there's more than a hundred years
of company law on this, on this very point.
Um, I'll give you a practical example.
It shocked me when I was a, a young lawyer, uh,
in my late twenties, and I set up the taxpayers union
and the late Dick quacks, uh,
former Auckland counselor contacted me wanting me to, um,
uh, file some leggos because of information he couldn't get.
And one of the examples that really struck out, stuck,
stuck out to me related to the performance standards
for the council's, um, contractor that did parks
and facilities maintenance.
It is apparently for the Auckland Council for the parent,
the largest tendered, um, contractor,
at least it was at the time as a counselor.
He could not get from the being chief executive,
the performance standards, despite the fact that
that issue was the most complained about issue
he had from constituents.
Well, we've set up a regime, whether you,
the council's only employees, the chief executive,
and we are, uh, uh,
those governing the organization are unable
to get the information to be able to hold into account.
And this bill puts the very decision in the hands
of the chief executive with apparently no ability to, um,
to appeal other than judicial review of what, uh,
information, sorry, not information documents, uh,
counselors are, um, able to access
or, um, uh, as reasonably required to be able to access
or not access to do their job.
Come on. Th this is not only a step backwards, it's, it,
it is, um, naive in the extreme of
how good governance works.
Thank you. Um, CWE Brown, uh, yes, I've got a couple
of questions, although we're not quite there.
Um, in this legislation you make a lot
of comments about rates capping.
So, um, if I may ask some questions on
that, can I ask a question?
Thank you. Um, first of all,
I don't, I would like to know in 26 B,
you talk about, um, rates
and the level of inflation, presumably you mean the CPI
and I just wondered what relationship we thought the
consumer price index had to changes that, um, councils have
to pay for roading, insurance and so forth.
And then I've got a subsequent question. Yeah.
This is, um, who's the former CEO of lg,
NZ who came up with this one?
They pay for bitman, not wheat books.
Um, uh, uh, it, it, it is a bit of a game of course,
because over the long term your CPI and, and, um,
and, uh, uh, producer price index should, um,
roughly come out equal over the long term.
Now, uh, there might be a, a, a timing issue.
Reasonable mines can differ as to
what inflation measure you might get.
But one of the issues, and it's one of the re one
of the ways we know LGNZ are trying to screw the scrum here
around rates cap is use a proprietary, uh, calculation,
I think done, contracted by, um, what used
to be called Sodom, the Union for the local government.
That's wrong. Yeah. It's, it's now got a, that
Name, I'm sure you can manage it, Jordan.
How, how do I say it? Sorry, I've forgotten
and said, I've just forgotten it.
It's not, how do I say it? Tied
To Tied Torah.
Tied Torah. Yeah. It means something like flame
or something, or the, the flame of knowledge
or, or, or something around.
They're terribly proud of it, but
I, I just always forget it.
Anyway, the point is that not only is a proprietary,
so there's a lack of transparency there.
I'm also concerned that it's circular,
that when you rely on the costs
of local government feeding the limit on the costs of local,
local government, it, um, it, it becomes self perpetuating.
If it was, you know, we already have, um, stat
yet already has, uh, inflation data for, um, uh,
for producers or for non-consumer inflation.
As I say, reasonable minds can differ as to
what one you pick, but over the long term,
they should converge.
Thank you. My other question is whether
having any kind of rates, tapping, whatever you tie it to,
um, rewards
and advantages, councils
that have had historically high rates increases,
whatever they spend it on, whether it might be, um,
Carsten has got excellent where I happen to live.
It's, um, coincidental.
Um, they've got excellent facilities,
excellent event center, um, good wastewater treatment.
They've monetary rivers achieved the most improved river
because they've spent money on those things.
Um, versus some council,
which I won't put a name to that may have had historically
lower than, um, adequate expenditure on things, but,
and let's just stick to the roads
and water and things like that.
And they've had it historically low
and they've got lots of problems.
And you're gonna cap them both,
or would you do some differential capping?
I mean, it, it just seems that you're creating
a far bigger problem by looking at rates capping. Yeah,
Look, um, I think you've got a fair point.
The example I always use,
because they're roughly the same size as Napier
and Hastings, because they had an infrastructure reset in
the 31 earthquake.
Um, one took a long time and spread it out.
Um, Hastings is a lot higher borrowing.
This is, it might be out of date now,
but certainly 10 when I was, when I was doing the rate,
the original rate payers reports versus Napier that, um,
that sweated their assets a bit more
and will be, you know, a, a, a bigger lump.
And if councils are doing their renewals properly
and not pinching money outta their renewals, it,
it shouldn't actually be much of a problem.
But look, some councils run more
of a Rolls-Royce service than others,
and we focus on the infrastructure,
but the majority of the spending is actually on,
uh, on opex.
Look, it's a, it's a fair cop, um, in terms of
what your base figure is.
I think that the bigger problem though
will be assuming this comes in next year, is how you deal
with the three waters, um, water done.
Now for that, that's being split off
because frankly, if you are a Tim or Joe, um,
or Sally, the, the rate payer, uh,
you'll be getting a new bill for your water.
Do you trust your local council to reduce your rates,
the equivalent amount
of what's coming out of your operations?
Well, I'm very worried. The answer that might be no.
And the government is gonna have to figure
that out at the same time.
Thank you very much. We've come to the end of our time,
but appreciate you both joining us today,
and we are gonna move to our next submission online,
which will be New Zealand Airports Association.
Mm,
Sure. Committee
chair.
Sure. Welcome. We've got 10 minutes for you,
so I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Otherwise, uh, all yours,
Thank you so much. Hopefully
my connection's. All right.
I'm here in Blenheim, um,
just finishing up our conference in our lugged room,
so I'm hoping it's okay.
Um, thank you for the opportunity. Um, I'll be quick.
Uh, obviously we represent airports, um, most
of which are owned, or at least in part owned
by local councils.
So, um, how this bill shapes local decision making really
does matter for us
and, um, our planning, our investment, and our growth.
Um, the main point I thought I'd highlight today is just
around, uh, ensuring the bill supports good commercial
decision making by councils and by council owned entities.
At the moment, the way the purpose clause is structured,
there is a bit of a risk that, um,
it's narrowing the focus a little too much
around what's cost effective right now, rather than
what would be productive and sustainable over time.
Um, and we're just keen to make sure
that we don't inadvertently discourage long-term investments
that would make councils
and their entities more financially resilient.
So I thought I'd just give you a really quick airport
example that, um, that has been kind of the,
very much the subject of a discussion over here
for the last few days.
A council loan airport might be able to lease a piece
of land tomorrow for some quick simple revenue,
but if instead they develop that land, say
by building a hangar maintenance facility, some other kind
of property development, um,
they'll obviously get a, a better return.
They might create jobs, support local businesses, diversify
and grow their airport revenue
and the council's rating base.
So it's really about making sure we can enable
that investment for growth.
Uh, it's already quite challenging for airports,
particularly our smaller ones around the network to
do this kind of activity,
but they do see the missed opportunity, um,
around them quite often.
And that revenue diversification is particularly essential
these days because of the concentration
of our domestic airline markets.
So we need to have the ability for these counciling entities
to ensure that they're developing other streams
of income in order to keep their essential services running.
So essentially just really keen
to make sure the legislation doesn't inadvertently make it
harder for things that might cost more,
but get better sustainable returns over time.
And, um, often that are quite logical commercial decisions.
And we've got very capable people in our system who can
plan and execute those kinds of projects.
Um, so we've made some suggestions in this
regard in our submission.
I, I'm hoping it's reasonably simple
and really just around making sure the intent
that the government has here, uh, follows through to
how councils might really react
and behave to, um, to the guidance that's
provided in the, uh, in the bill. Thank you.
Thank you. And can I just ask, are you concerned that
airports wouldn't fall under the, um,
under the 10 b good quality local infrastructure?
No, I think, I think that's pretty good.
Um, I think the legislation is good when it comes to, um,
incorporating, um,
airport infrastructure the way it refers to other legislation.
So that's reasonably tidy.
It's really about, um, I'm quite conscious
how these things can influence council behavior
and obviously, um, airports are managed, some
of them are managed as council units,
so they're within the council structure.
Some of them are CCOs.
Um, most of them will have council related boards.
And so the pressure
or the guidance in these kinds of pieces
of legislation can cascade around what they see
as acceptable
and right things to do, the
benchmarking that's gonna be introduced.
So, um, that's why we've made a few suggestions just
to future proof and make sure it doesn't lead to behavior
that actually wouldn't be as productive
as we'd, as we'd wanna see.
Understood. Thank you. Yeah.
Um, well, I really, I was just gonna
Ask a quick such, just in terms of, um,
what you've just said.
Yeah. Um, how can you, so the, in the bill,
um, uh, you, you are comfortable, you said, at a level
of comfort with the wording.
Yeah. But if, if, um, just on your earlier point,
if it does get out of hand in terms of behavior
or understanding from a council perspective, what,
what could you suggest as a remedy?
Yeah, so we've made some suggestions around, um,
how those purpose clauses might be made a little bit more
holistic because at the moment, some
of the economic development
and tension could be seen as subsidiary
to cost effectiveness.
And that's where we are kind of talking about
what might be cost effective in the short term,
may actually not be the best commercial decision.
So there is some suggested tweaking there.
Um, but you make a good point.
Um, there's also remedy that can be through the guidance
and expectation that the government then sets
as it implements the bill.
So we do see a role, uh, for working with ministers
and agencies on that side of it once it starts
to be implemented, what does good look like?
What is the government's expectation
and how do they hope that the bill is interpreted
once it becomes law?
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, appreciate your time with us, uh, today,
and good luck for the travel home from Blenheim.
Thank you so much, everyone. Appreciate it.
Fantastic. Thank you.
Um, okay. Well, I think we're gonna go
to Ash Burin District Council,
and we might have, uh, do we don't have the two individual?
Not, not yet. They may join us online soon,
but, um, if we have Ash Burton online Great.
Turn on your cameras
and
just give them a minute.
Yeah. Turn on your camera. Oh, here we are.
Thank you, uh, for joining us.
We've got 10 minutes, uh, for you. So, um, oh, here we go.
So, uh, I'll hand over the time to you.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run
and you might like to leave some time for questions.
All yours.
Lovely. Thank you. Um, I'm Mullin, uh, deputy Mayor
of Ash Burin, and with me is Hamish React,
our CE from Ashburn District Council.
So thank you for the opportunity to speak on our submission.
Uh, we support the Bill's intent, overarching, um, intent
of the bill to improve transparency,
strengthen accountability, improve value for money.
However, we do believe the bill does not address the real
causes for rate increases, risks,
increasing compliance costs,
and reduces council's ability to respond to community needs.
So some of the recommendations we have, um,
and comments, um, specifically,
infrastructure costs are the real driver of rates.
So we would consider that rate
increases are primarily driven by infrastructure costs,
not discretionary spending.
So in Ash Burton, 80%
of our capital expenditure is on water and transport.
75% of annual operating expenditure is on core services.
So the cost pressures stem from inflation
and rising material costs, labor shortages, wage pressures,
global surprise chain, disrupt disruptions,
interest rates, insurance, et cetera.
And these are external factors beyond council control.
And the bill does not address these underlying cost drivers.
Uh, we su we have support for broad empowering approach.
So the bill proposes replacing the current broad purpose
of local government with a narrower focus on core services
and cost effectiveness.
And our council's view is
that local authorities play a broad role in fostering
livable communities.
The current purpose, which includes the four wellbeings,
is clear, consistent, and widely understood
and supported by evidence showing it has not led
to excessive spending.
But we have concerns for narrow that the purpose is,
has been narrowed by, um, reducing council's flexibility
to meet community needs.
It introduces vague terms like most cost effective,
which are open to legal challenge, challenge
and adds complexity and compliance costs.
So we recommend retaining the four wellbeings
and current purpose in the act.
Core services definition won't change what we deliver.
Um, and an ash burden, 75%
of annual expenditure is already on core services.
Around 25% of our budget is on services
that might be deemed non-core.
Many of our existing non-core services are legally required
or community prioritized.
So our key concerns that the proposed course will increase
compliance costs as seen in previous legislation,
create confusion around what qualifies as a core service,
exclude, uh, statutory obligations like cemeteries
and airports, and overlooks essential amenities like public
toilets, which are vital for tourism
and community wellbeing.
Uh, the risk of rates capping.
We are concerned that this clause sets the stage
for rates capping,
and the Australian experience shows rates CAPS can undermine
local service delivery overall rates CAP may result in
unattended consequences such as council seeking exemptions,
adding complexities and delays.
We recommend the complete removal
of section 11 A from the bill
or amending as set out in the submission, uh,
transparency and accountability amendments.
Um, we support with additions outlined in the submission.
Uh, so reporting on consultant
and contractor expenditure, standardizing codes of conduct
and standing orders,
and ensuring elective members have access
to necessary information.
We would caution that, um,
councils must retain flexibility to reflect local needs
over standardization, may reduce responsiveness
and add unnecessary work and confidentiality.
And responsible information handling must
also be maintained.
So in the regulatory relief
and governance improvements, we support, um,
with some suggestions, um, outlined in our submission,
removing the mandatory six yearly service delivery reviews,
extending the chief executive employment terms, um, from two
to five years, clarifying the role
of acting chief executives in signing compliance
certificates, recognizing third party funding
and development contributions.
So in summary, our key recommendations are remove clauses
that redefine the purpose of local government
and introduce the core services clause,
retain the four wellbeings to ensure clarity, consistency,
and community relevance.
Avoid rates capping based on narrow D definitions
of core services, ensure changes, reduce,
not increase compliant costs, maintain flexibility
and governance and planning
to reflect diverse community priorities.
Retain the requirement to consider TE Maori
and C-C-A-C-C-O appointments,
support provisions that improve transparency,
reduce red tape and strengthen accountability.
So in closing, um, thank you again for the opportunity
to present and we welcome any further engagement
and look forward to working with the committee
to strengthen local government in a way
that support supports communities, delivers values
and respects the diverse roles council plays
across New Zealand.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
I've just got a question from, uh, Celia
Brown. Thank you. Thank
you for an excellent
and detailed submission.
And I like in particular, you know, your list
of things in um, 39, um,
paragraph 39, very helpful.
Um, but I wanted to pick up on a point that is UI think,
unique to your submission.
Um, other people have raised, um,
the issue about the empowering, um, options.
It's really about the buy local policy.
And I was just interested that you feel that
that could be up for challenge,
but presumably on the other hand, it does provide, um,
local economic development and reduced environmental impact
or whatever your reasons might be for having a bilocal.
And if you could talk a little bit more about
what you've been achieving with it,
and also whether you think it's at risk from
this legislation.
Um, uh, thank you.
Perhaps, perhaps I can answer that in the first instance.
Um, our, our concern is, uh, how it fits with the definition
of most cost effective.
Uh, and, um, does, uh, buying local,
which may come at a premium, uh, does that then qualify
as most cost effective?
Uh, and I think what will likely happen is councils will,
uh, still want to have policies, uh, like buy local
'cause their communities are very, uh, keen on them.
Uh, and we'll end up having to have, um,
tortuous justification, uh, processes, uh,
so that if we are ever challenged, we'll be able to point
to the thinking that we did to prove
that it was, um, cost effective.
So it's just more compliance, more admin, more bureaucracy.
And could you just elucidate why you've gotta
buy local policy?
I, and partly 'cause your community wants it, as I've heard,
but what are your main reasons for it
To support the local economy?
Uh, so that the, um,
local businesses have a fair crack at
council's, uh, business.
We have, we have quite a complex policy.
It's got layers, uh, over, over a certain level.
Um, it's always open intended in the open market,
but at lower levels, uh, we do have, um,
a bilocal, um, advantage.
Thank you very much. It's obviously not the only point,
but it was a unique point.
Thank you. Yeah, it is a, um, a a unique point, uh,
and I think well, well made in terms of
what you wanted to articulate.
Can I just ask, uh,
and um, you know,
I noticed from the local council elections at the moment
in the, in the district I come from,
everyone is campaigning on restricting rate rises
and cutting back on spending.
Um, no one's out there actively campaigning on
we'll spend more so
that we can buy local and things like that.
Is is it, is it a case of what people want to say
and what people want to do
are different things, do you think?
I'm not referring to Ash Burin specifically here, but,
but it's really hard in terms of
that transparency piece if people want
to behave in a certain way
'cause they think it's the right thing to do,
but everyone campaigns in a different direction. Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I, I would say you're correct.
Um, and I think, um, as Hamish mentioned,
the bilocal is something
that we've heard from our local community that,
um, that's what they want.
Um, and I guess is, um, the new council will go in
and that will be something
that they will obviously consider, um,
but it will be a balance of cost as well.
Yeah. So I mean, you can absolutely do that
and be say, well, we as a council,
we are deciding we will spend this bit more
and rates will go up a little bit more,
but we will do that if it helps us achieve local, right.
They won't be able future.
Yes. I I, I think
however, the community doesn't draw
that parallel quite so clearly.
So they want local, um, businesses to do well
and they want local people to be employed
and to have families at our schools.
Uh, but they still want, um, cheap as possible rates.
So I don't know that, yeah, I don't know
that the connection is quite as linear
as you've drawn it to be fair. I think they want both.
Yes. I think that's very fair.
Well, look, thank you for your time
and wish you all the best down ash person.
Um, uh, and we are gonna move to our last two submissions
before the house resumes. Yeah,
Great services and low rates.
Um, we all one thank you. We've got Phil Stevens.
Phil, we've got five minutes for you.
I'll let you know when there's one minute to run.
Um, but feel free to leave time for questions in there.
You can unmute and go for it.
Here we go. Can you hear me? Yes.
Yeah. Good. Yeah, co Stevens Koua.
Um, yeah, so thanks for having me here to talk
and, um, uh, KDA to, um, minister Watts.
I'm looking forward to seeing you
and Rota in a couple of weeks
at the Residues revenues conference.
And I just wanted to go on record with, um,
with some concerns,
some rather deep concerns about this bill
and the, the framing around it, which is the, um,
stated purpose of less, uh, less interference
and greater localism.
But what it's actually doing is putting more constraints
and more strictures on councils.
And I note in the principles, uh, at the, at the heading
of the, of the, the bill are, uh,
providing relief from cost of living pressures.
And of course, uh, all of us who pay rates have seen this,
uh, seen this very, uh, very pointedly.
But, um, as a lot of us understand,
this is partially a manufactured crisis
because, uh, the single biggest cost
that council space is in infrastructure.
So the redefinition of core services, uh, is,
is a little bit facile
because councils are already
devoting the largest portion of their spend on investing in
and maintaining assets.
And those are, those are the, the roads and the pipes and,
and the services or the, the things
that deliver the services.
And, um, you know, we can, we can point
to one large decision made by this government
to repeal three waters, which took away, uh, a very large,
um, assumption of a financial backstop that councils had
that has been effectively yanked out from underneath them.
And now they're faced with how to improve in, in what,
in many cases is an infrastructure
that's been run down for decades.
And there's, there's nowhere else for them to turn.
So, so this is, uh, you know, this is sort
of an untenable situation.
A lot of councils are, are backed
up against the wall with this.
So there needs to be, um, a, a better system of funding,
funding vehicles to deliver the investment
and maintenance that these asset bases require.
Uh, another concern is that this, the language in the bill,
uh, is, is very, very direct about cost effectiveness.
And, um, it has sort
of a balance sheet mentality which ignores the fact
that public services are delivered for a, uh,
for a intangible good.
The, the, the, you know, the, the, the greater good of,
of the residents and rate payers in a
certain council catchment.
And you can't always ascribe a dollar value to those,
but if you take them away, you do see burdens and,
and detrimental outcomes.
So I think, I think a lot of that language is, um,
is unnecessarily constraining.
And what it does too, is it sets up a framework
by which councils will be, will be measured
and come up with incentives
or sometimes coercion to sell off assets
or to hand over service delivery to private entities.
And every time this happens, every time we see,
we can look overseas and we can look within our own borders.
Every time a council hands over one of these core services
to a third party, we lose a lot of transparency,
we lose accountability.
But most of all, we lose cost effectiveness
because as soon as you give something
to a private sector entity to deliver,
they've gotta make a profit
because they've got to pay not just the, the salaries
and the cost of delivering the service,
but now there's an expectation from their shareholders
of dividends and in increased equity.
So it's axiomatic.
As soon as you bring the private sector into this,
you're going to get either higher costs
or decrease levels of service.
There's no way around it.
So setting up an environment where this is seen
as a desirable outcome is basically dooming the residents
of, uh, of localities in New Zealand
to situations like we're seeing in the UK
where water services get privatized
and pretty soon you've got boiled water notices right,
and left and beaches that can't be swam out anymore.
Another thing we've got is this, uh, this idea that, uh,
that the wellbeings are not actually part
of core service delivery.
I think a lot of, uh, of residents of cities
and regions would, would beg to differ
because what, what's, uh, what's very real
to us out here is that the, uh, the wellbeing of communities
is very much something that has to be handled locally.
It's not being, it's not something
that we can get from central government agencies,
and the councils as well are at the sharp end
of climate adaptation.
So when we get these extreme rainfall events,
when we get the floods and the,
and the, you know, the massive weather events,
it's the councils that are cleaning up the mess
and the councils that have to upgrade their infrastructure
to cope with the burden.
So once again, this is all landing on the councils
who then have to go to their rate payers
to finance the improvements to deal with these things.
They're not getting a whole lot of help.
So, um, my main concern is that by removing the wellbeings,
we're removing one of the mechanisms the councils have
to build a little bit more resilience
and to deliver strategic outcomes
and not just talk about the roads
and the pipes and the reserves.
So I've got a just sort of broad, broad based picture
of some solutions that would include keeping the wellbeings,
keeping the conga requirements for contractors and CCOs,
but in, uh, in a much more, um, foundational sense,
we need to rethink of how we, of
how we move financing requirements
and how we move the financing responsibilities
and have central government more in partnership
with councils instead
of just standing over them with a stick.
And one of those would be population index grants
to be tagged for capital and maintenance of infrastructure.
This would be, uh, this would be a good way to,
to ameliorate the, the loss
of the three waters provisions we add.
Then another one would be, sorry, we,
We, we are just almost right on time,
so if you want to wrap things.
Okay. Alright.
Well, and, and another big one right there, you, if you want
to give every rate payer 15% break, uh,
you could do it tomorrow by removing GST.
So I'd, I'd, uh, I'd, uh, say you could, you could put
that one into the hopper as well.
Well, thank you very much, um,
and thanks for taking the extra couple of minutes just
to get a bit more, and we appreciate it and,
and I wish you the best.
We are gonna move to our next ER now,
who's hopefully joining us online.
Theo Vander. Yes.
Thank you. Um, Theo, we've got, uh, five minutes for you,
so, um, I'll let you know when there's a minute to run, but
otherwise feel free to leave room for questions if you like.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you to the committee for the opportunity
to sit on the bill.
My name is Theo Vander Clut.
I'm a final year law student at the University of Auckland.
I've written on local government law,
particularly comparative local government law,
and I'm a local body candidate standing
for the Weiss Matar local board with the city vision ticket.
I suppose the, the, before I get into
the substance of my submission, Mr.
Chair, um, I think the cardinal point that I want
to draw the committee's attention to is, is really
that local challenges are best solved
by local decision makers.
And the question that I would pose to this committee is
with the current bill in front of the committee, are we
creating a relationship or a power dynamic between central
and local government where central government can impose its
will on local government?
And as a ancillary question to that, I would say if
that is the case, are we creating a system
or upholding a system of local government,
or are we simply treating local government like a crown
entity or a state own enterprise that can be directed, uh,
rather than, um, having the,
the u the democratic quality
of decision making being upheld?
Firstly, um, I believe that, uh, that the current system,
particularly with the four four Wellbeings, um,
which has been mentioned in previous submissions
as a really flexible way of, uh,
encouraging good local government decision making
and governance, um,
because it gives the, um, local authorities the ability
to consider a wide range of measures such as the cultural,
social, economic, and environmental wellbeing
of their communities, um, beyond simply the
rate payer metric that certain center, right, uh,
people in local government would have you believe.
Secondly, I believe that the core services, um, aspect
of this bill is really a political rubric, uh, designed
by this current government to bully local authorities
and, um, local councils into delivering a certain
core set of services that centers
property owning people at the center of local government.
And they already are, um, at the center
of local government when it comes to understanding the types
of people that get elected.
The, the, a lot of the convenience
of local government is angled towards people
of a wealthier class.
So I don't believe we should simply be measuring local
government or service delivery according to that metric.
And um, thirdly, and finally,
and this is where I probably touch into a little bit
of the research that I've done in the
local government space.
Um, and I think it was in the regulatory impact statement
that informed this bill, um,
taking inspiration from the local government Act,
the New South Wales Local Government Act 1993 is a exercise
that I would really caution members against.
It's a very old piece of legislation.
It's a piece of legislation that tends to favor, um, a lot
of ministerial discretion, particularly when it comes
to amalgamation and also relieving councils of their duties.
And I think that considering that this, um,
this course services bill will be linked to
how councils are, uh, dismissed,
or how, uh, statutory relief is applied, that we need
to be legislating in a way that actually encourages, um,
more, or sorry, legislating outwardly rather than
legislating in a way that favors arbitrary, um, discretion.
Uh, so I think that that if, uh, parliament were going
to be influenced by other pieces
of leg legislation across the ditch.
Uh, the Victorian local Government Act 2020
is a really good starting point.
So is the Queensland Local Government Act 2009,
particularly when it comes to defining, uh, service delivery
and uh, also the link to, uh, the Crown intervention, uh,
provisions because ultimately this core services bill it is,
is, uh, or describes one function of local government,
but it will be, um, linked with, um, other bills such
as the rates capping legislation that we will see.
I think earlier it may have been passed already later in the
year, but, um, I think we need to be far more progressive in
how we think about this and also leave this type
of decision making to the communities
that elect local councils and local boards in.
So thank you Mr. Chair. That's my submission.
Um, if there are any questions, I'm happy to take them.
Um, but thank you for your time.
Thank you. We've got 30 seconds left. I'll give it to
Celia right now. Oh, I just
really wanted
to thank you in this busy election time for taking the time
to make a submission.
That's all I wanted to say. Thank you.
Thank you. Fantastic.
Well thank, thank you very much
and, uh, we wish you all the best.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Have a good day. Cheers. You too.
Now with that, we will end the public part of this meeting.